I'll roll tape here for a second. Daryl, I'm gonna be throwing you a signal
tape-delayed, so you can check what it sounds like on the tape. Okay, you're now
tape-delayed. What does it sound like? Yeah. Okay, now you should be just
gettin' one voice. Two voices. Hold on.
Okay, now you should be just getting one voice. Still two voices? Oh, I don't
know what it is. Hang on. Ok now you're getting one voice. Ok. Joe say hello to
Daryl. Hello Daryl. Are you anywhere?
What did you sound like Daryl? Sounds good? Ok. Switching back to standard.
Alrighty.
We're ready to go on this end. And are you okay? You said on that end? Yeah.
Okay.
I read the forward in The Study of War No More again last night. So some of this
stuff is things you've already talked about and other things. But a lot of
people who listen to the show probably, if they read books, they don't read
forward. Yeah. OK, this is my first question. OK. Oh, yeah. Some of the
questions will not be exactly a question. I'll just make a statement, and then
you can respond to it, like this first one. Your writing started out as a hobby
that developed into a profession, didn't it? Well yeah, although the development
was fairly rampant. I always wrote ever since I was in second or third grade. I
wrote a lot of poetry. When I was a senior in college, my last semester, I took
a creative writing course. I was in physics and astronomy, but I wanted to take
something easy to fill out my 18 hours or so. I wrote two science fiction
stories. Eventually, I sold both of them. I was drafted and then when I came
back from Vietnam they give you 30 days leave and I just retyped the stories
then and sent them out and one of them sold before I was out of the army. Then I
don't know I just uh... I never thought you could make very much money at it but
I saw it as sort of a source of beer money. And when I decided to drop out of
graduate school and try a semester of writing full time I sold my first novel
about a couple of days after I dropped out so I never went back. That would tend
to kind of cement things. Yeah. Yeah, it's funny. Coincidence has a lot to do
with it. There's an awful lot of luck in getting started writing. Yeah. Your
first works had to do with war. You were in Vietnam and that must have had a
significant impact on you. Oh yeah. Yeah, well it's uh, of course, it's the most
dramatic thing that's ever happened to me so it's the most obvious, uh, fuel for
my fiction. Although I don't want to be typed as a writer about war. I have
written two novels and edited one anthology about it. Yeah. Yeah. The old adage,
to write what you know, and of the things I know, that's the one that's most,
uh, universally interesting. Okay, yeah, a couple of the following questions
have to do with war
and some of the themes you have in some of your books and stories. Okay, here
they come. Okay. In Infinite Dreams, which is a collection of stories you
published in various publications since about 1972, war and violence linked with
a change in mankind's behavior seem to be recurrent themes in some of these
stories. Are you saying that sometimes man has to face violent conflicts in
order to change his behavior? Well, I don't think I'm coming out and saying it
that directly. I think it's obvious that confronting death on a daily basis
changes people and sometimes radically for the worse than people who are totally
dehumanized by war. But speaking racially, I don't think you could make such a
broad statement. what's behind some of the things I'm writing is the hope that
human nature eventually may improve to the point where we won't have wars find
other ways to settle our differences Yeah
Let me skip up that I got another question that has to deal with that let me
find it here well
Dave is trying to find his question that he just wrote down about half an hour
ago maybe
I missed that one when I was transcribing it to type written material yeah I'm
actually good being in the Army was so that important effect on my writing aside
from war because I met a whole new class of people. That is, all of my friends,
while I was growing up, tended to be white middle-class, upper-middle-class
kids, and their successors. White middle-class, upper-class scientists, and so
forth. And it was just a mundane revelation to find that people who came from
different backgrounds still had an awful lot in common with me. As most of The
guys in my combat outfit were urban black high school or junior high school
dropouts. They got along quite well. Yeah, I found the question. Okay. In both
your novels, Mind Bridge and Forever War, you have mankind united in the face of
a crisis with an alien race. Do you think that we'll ever be able to progress
without this sort of conflict spurring it on? I wonder whether, well, of course,
it's a simplification, and it's an old theme in science fiction. That is
everybody getting together because the Martians are after us. I wish I could say
that I thought that we would be able to do this in the face of a less dramatic
uniform enemy. That is, obviously, the combined threats of overpopulation, and
dwindling resources, and industrial pollution, are as threatening as either of
the enemies in those two novels. But we can't make a coherent face against this
enemy and fight it. It's a way of making specific a sort of a real but diffuse
nightmare,
some of your stories that do deal with war and conflict on a personal level
there's a story where a man is hit by a laser mine and his leg is cut off he's
hurt personally family, does that relate to something in your own experiences? I
was wounded pretty severely in Vietnam. I was hospitalized for 6 months. And it
was a booby trap. I didn't set it off, somebody else did, but it was a pretty
big one. And I had over 200 separate wounds. But managed to come out of it
alright after a few months of physical therapy. so it's uh yeah i draw on that
experience uh the one you're talking about is a mind of his own but i think i've
got other uh short stories like the private war of private jacob that draw on
that memory yeah are you exercising demons pardon are you exercising some demons
i don't uh i don't know whether i am or not i think i'm just using available
material will. I don't think the demon is too easily exercised by fiction.
That's a truism that I don't think is always true. Yeah. In your first novel,
Forever War, it's a novel that deals with war on an intergalactic or in a
galactic level.
It's similar in some respects to Heinlein's Starship Troopers. Did you
intentionally write it as sort of an answer to that or has it just come about
that the work ended up that way? Well, there was no intention on my part. In
fact, I didn't realize until I was about 70 or 80 pages into the book that many
of the details were similar to Starship Troopers. Somebody else pointed that out
when he read the manuscript. I wasn't doing an answer to Heinlein's book. I
thought Heinlein's book was admirable in many ways, even though we have
diametrically opposed philosophies.
But if there's any relation to any book, it is to my own first novel, War Year,
because it's an expansion into a science fiction universe of the notions that I
was trying to express in mainstream novel. Yeah, that was... ...incidentally,
wrote me a nice postcard after the Forevermore won the Hugo, pointing out that
we do have certain things in common that most reviewers didn't see. Dislike for
the draft being one of them. Yeah, I've heard he's a very interesting man. Yeah.
Also, in Forever Warrior you deal with time compression on the starships. They
travel off to battle at speeds near to that of light, and then when they return,
hundreds of years have passed on the Earth. That's hard science. Yeah. Many
writers, if they're considered hard science or soft science, and some mix the
two styles together, what part does hard science play in your writing? Well, I
try to use it to make the worlds that are in an event more beliefful. At least
to me, since I do have a background in science and engineering, I think— well,
the writer has to at least suspend his own disbelief while he's making up these
stories. It's easier for me to do it at a fairly solid scientific foundation.
Even though my science is rather old-fashioned to probably rather sloppy by a
real scientist's standards. It's still enough to convince me, so it's fulfilled
its function. For instance, it goes deeper than just description, the time
dilation in the forever war. Though it's scientifically accurate, its main
function is metaphorical. and that is to demonstrate how the soldiers who fight
a war become isolated from the culture that they're supposed to be protecting.
Just using a science fictional device to exaggerate something that happens to
every soldier. Yeah, and that when these soldiers leave and come back, the world
they left is in even the same world once they get back to it. Which is quite
true. I remember when I came back from Vietnam, I was suddenly plunged into what
was an alien culture, even though I'd only been a soldier for two years. A lot
of things had changed. You know, it's not a great thing to come back. There were
no victory parades and that sort of thing.
Yeah. I can empathize with that. Yeah. The conflicts aside, Forever War and Mind
Bridge have optimistic endings. But in your novel, All My Sins Remembered, was
that put together from a series of short stories? About half of it appeared as
two novelettes, you know. Yeah. But in the end of it, the protagonist is just
literally turned off and killed at the end of it. It's a rather pessimistic
ending. Well, it was planned all along that way. The story is about a
bureaucracy that totally takes over a man's identity, and he doesn't really
exist except as a tool for that bureaucracy. When he becomes an efficient tool,
he's scrapped. Yeah, he's programmed to go out and do certain, I guess what
you'd call covert operations. Yeah. and he does them more or less against his
will that is to say through very advanced techniques of conditioning he's turned
into a thoroughly different person he was a Buddhist a pacifist when he started
out he did not get the job he signed up for they twisted him around into being a
killing machine and at the end of it he what rebelled against that yeah finally
man, he was no longer suited their purpose and then they got rid of him. Right.
Yeah. Uh, uh, jumping up to MIND BBRIDGE, um, it's dedicated to your teachers at
the Iowa Writers Workshop. Right. And the style of the novel is unusual. Is
there a connection with that? Oh, not really. The connection is with John Dos
Passos, actually. I read the USA Trilogy some years before I wrote Mind Bridge
and really was impressed by the way it worked and thought it would work really
well in science fiction. So I tried it out in a rather long short story to
Howard Hughes, A Modest Proposal. And it looked like it would work, so I went
ahead and applied it to Mind Bridge. I did do most of that book while I was
studying at Iowa, That's why it's a dedication.
You also used some humor to Howard Hughes' Amada's proposal. Do you find that a
useful tool to get across your message? Yeah. Sarcasm is the operative word. I
think even in a deadly serious book there has to be some leavening of humor. A
lot of science fiction is just too somber and full of message. I think my
primary function is to be an entertainer. Humor is part of that.
I also noticed in the dedication, a lot of the authors at the workshop were
mainstream authors. What was their reaction to science fiction? Well, they were
a little apprehensive about it. See, they didn't know I was a science fiction
writer when I joined the workshop. So I joined on the basis of my first novel,
which was not science fiction. And some of them were outwardly hostile towards
science fiction, such as Stanley Elkham. Others were anywhere between
apprehensive and slightly sympathetic.
Yeah. Yeah. But they couldn't ignore the fact that I was making more money than
most of them were with my science fiction. and that might have been a cause of
tension in some cases. Yeah, that's a point that's kind of hard to argue with.
Yeah. Yeah, that attitude is one I've never really been able to understand
because some of our greatest novels are science fiction novels. Well, that's
true. But the field is judged by its worst, not by its best. And people like
that think of science fiction, they think in terms of grade B movies and lousy
television. They have never read much of that best of the field.
It's a pity. That's true.
Back again to the Mine Bridge, a specific question about it. The alien race that
created the Mine Bridge, you suggest they commit racial suicide. Why do you
think a supposedly advanced race would do something like that? I don't know. I
was feeling, well, they've lived for millions or hundreds of millions or even
billions of years thoroughly, individually immortal, and there just wasn't
anything else that they hadn't done, except died. But that's sort of a throw
away. I didn't put any deep thought into why they should do that. I just wanted
the image of the light from their passing, lighting up the Knights of the Earth
while humans were just meandered gone. They supernova-ed this star. The Cygnus
loop is the remains of the civilization. Yeah.
I may be wrong here in this next question so correct me if I am. In Tri
-Centennial, when the starship returns to Earth all of the humans are gone,
Yeah, it never returns actually. It doesn't return, okay. That is a shift in
view point. Oh, okay, what happened to the humans on the Earth? Some sort of a
war, I assume. Okay. The um, it doesn't say anything except that there's no life
left on Earth and it looks pretty much like an ecological zero, it's just a void
And my other question about Trostantino is who were the beings in the glass and
metal tubes? Oh, those are the leftovers, the people who were on the L5 type
colony, they're still there Their society is a closed-cycle agriculture society,
and there's no reason that they would have to die when the earth died. Uh-huh,
okay. Yeah.
In various novels and stories that you've written, you've created some excellent
aliens. How do you go about constructing your aliens? Not very logically. I've
been asked that before, and it's a hard thing to answer. I know, for instance,
the LeVrye in Mind Bridge. I did have this notion of aliens who were shape
changers, who appeared as angelically beautiful creatures, but were ferocious
killers, mindless killers. I wanted that image. But normally, I don't know the
Sikang and All My Sons Remembered. I just thought I'd make a big bug that had a
Jewish sense of humor. Everything else is decoration. You sort of close your
eyes and see this critter and type it down. I have on occasion looked through
books of animal anatomy and just glanced through biology and botany textbooks to
try to be inspired by natural forms, but I don't have any algorithm that I know
works for making monsters.
In MindBridge and Forever War, humanity has greatly changed at the end of both
books, almost an evolutionary difference. do you believe that we will have
radically different natures in the future? I think it's quite possible even say
within the span of a century so many of the things that determine human nature
are things that can be mitigated by technology such as the problem of dying so
soon that is it's possible that we'll in a couple of generations to be able to
live a century, two centuries, maybe a thousand years maybe as long as you care
to that will radically change human nature because it will take the pressure off
of individuals
there are other less so sanguine notions it's possible that the sciences of
communication will grow into a kind of sophisticated mind control where it will
be difficult for the individual to know exactly what is his idea and what has
been induced by his own society. Sort of a sophisticated, lifelong brainwashing.
It doesn't seem too unlikely. If you can argue that it's happening now. Similar
to what Colonel Luther Pohl did in Space Merchants. Right. is Space Merchants'
chillingly prophetic novel, actually. They do a lot of things with our heads.
Those of us who stay away from the TV screen aren't as affected by others, but
it is there. Yeah.
Out of the novels and short stories that you've written, which one did you enjoy
writing the most? Let me see. Strangely enough,
I think I enjoyed most writing a pseudonymous adventure novel called Antar's
Revenge because it was so easy. Most of my writing was very difficult to do. And
this was just setting a spy up and letting him knock the bad guys down and win
in the end is all very pleasant in terms of more serious work I think Mind
Bridge was the most fun to ride I had the most latitude there I also enjoyed
that the most until this latest one worlds
yeah I read Atar the Merman oh god I guess it was couple years back. When did
you write that? I guess about 1971.
I didn't even know it was you. That one I got captured by the cover.
But that appeared to be the beginning of a series. Yes, that's right. The idea
was I was going to write three or four and then somebody else is going to pick
it up. That's why it's not under my name. It's what they call a house name. And
I got tired of the damn thing after two. I did write a third one and got paid
for it, but it's pretty lousy and they didn't print it. And then the whole
series just fizzled away. I guess they were working on a contemporary enthusiasm
over dolphins. and when that started evaporating, they put the kibosh on the
series. Or maybe they couldn't find anybody to continue it. Yeah, I would
imagine writing a series book like that would be difficult. Well, the first
one's easy. And in the case of Antar, the second one was pretty easy, too. But
I've also done two Star Trek novels, which are sort of series. It gets old real
fast. You can't make up things. You have to be consistent with the canon that
you've already established. And that can get real boring after about 100,000
words. Tiresome. Yeah, and the Star Trek material that you've written, the
framework is already built, and you have to build a story around the framework.
Yeah, it's already established. That was sort of cute though – writing the first
one I had fun because I'd been in service during most of Star Trek. So I had to
treat it as a research project and I went and saw the TV show every afternoon,
and then I read all the books and made charts and things like that and sat down
and wrote the books. That was an odd thing, I had to sign a two-bump contract.
And whereas I found the first one very interesting and fun to write, the second
one was quite difficult to write. And the first one took three months, and the
second took nine. How did you get approached to write those? Well, it was just
being in the right place at the right time. In a way, you know, Jim Blish was
doing the series of these things, and I knew they were quite financially
successful. and when Jim died I was in correspondence with Fred Poe who was his
editor there and I just you know apologized for being like a vulture circling
over the corpse but asked whether anybody was picking up Jim's work and he said
why don't you give it a try
and actually well Jim was taking the scripts from the TV show and just turning
them into short stories, whereas they wanted me to do what Jim would have done
if he had lived, which was write original novels around the Star Trek
characters. One of the novels was Planet of Destruction. Excuse me, Planet of
Judgment. Excuse me.
Let's see. I read one of them and that was one that had to do where they
discovered I guess what would be sort of considered a Dyson sphere yeah is that
Planet of Judgment or is that the other one World Without End World Without End
I could not find that book tore my library up trying to find it oh I like doing
the technical part of that it's not a Dyson sphere well it is a hollowed out
asteroid Bernal sphere There isn't a proper name for it. But I tried to work out
this alien science. I've got a notebook full of stuff about how flying aliens
would build their cities. Isn't that part was fun enough. I had to abuse myself
somehow.
Off the cuff question here. Um, anybody ever consider them for possible Star
Trek episodes? Well, unfortunately, I have no say in that. They can, they're
quite free to take them without asking me or paying me. It's part of the
contract at Paramount. Oh, how wonderful at Paramount. Yeah.
Uh, okay. Um, uh, as to your writing itself, How do you go about constructing
your novels? Do you come up with an idea for the novel or characters and then
work them into a particular setting or what? Well, the most consistent pattern
they have is working out the actual structure, the way time is handled in the
novel. It sounds rather dry, but I don't like to outline the story in any detail
because then there are no surprises. So I start out with the structure, how the
viewpoint is handled and so forth, and start working and modify the structure as
the story builds. Usually I have some vague idea of how it's going to end that
becomes less vague as the novel progresses. In short stories I normally start
with a character who seems interesting and make him do something. ... in other
words you set up sort of a lettuce work and then you let the story build itself
on that. Yeah. That seems to work better for me. Although often the structure
does have to be modified halfway through. I don't you know want to fit into a
Procrastean bed by it. Yeah, um, Okay. I wanna ask some questions about worlds,
but this is going to be a neat trick, see, because I haven't rid it yet.
Yeah, from Viking. From Viking and hardcover. You got a paper contract out on it
yet?
You've had pretty good luck with going from hardcover to paper, haven't you?
Yeah, so far I have. The reason for doing it is to maintain a high level of
critical attention for the books. These books that are sold as paperback
originals don't get reviewed in the right places. Because you do get more money
up front, of course, doing a paperback deal. But it seems to have worked in my
case to go with the traditional route. Yeah.
let's go ahead and keep tape rolling what is briefly just real briefly what is
worlds about it's the first part of a first part of a trilogy yeah
what is what's happening in Joel Haldeman's world in worlds well it starts out
about a century from now and it's essentially the story of a woman who grew up,
was born and grew up on a space colony a space settlement and is sent to Earth
for a year of post-graduate work or finishing if you want to call it that being
set up for a political position as a liaison between this world and Earth and
various strange things happen to her in the year that she's here It's sort of a
old heldong so a mad kind of a novel. She grows by being sort of bounced around
by Earth. And the second novel, Stars, takes over where the first one ends and
takes her into old age. Will all three novels be following this one character?
No, she dies in the second one. I think. I haven't finished the second one.
That's an interesting way of writing. You discover it as you write it. Yeah it's
best for me. Some people have to outline very meticulously. But when I do that I
lose interest in it. Yeah you already know it's going to happen. Yeah just type
it. Right.
What did... come on Dave, phrase the question.
What made you decide to put together a trilogy rather than just like one novel?
Well, it seems like an awfully big thing to put into one book. And it looks as
if each one of the trilogy, each volume of the trilogy, will be longer than any
other book I've ever written. By at least a third in each one. So indeed, it
would have been a book nearly a half million words long. It's rather difficult
to sell. and I just, you know, everybody's doing trilogies, so I can't, I do a
trilogy, too, as part of it. They're very successful. The second and third books
have a built-in audience.
Also, I wanted to try something big.
Half a million words is pretty big. Yeah.
I was stifling laughs there when you were talking about everybody who's written
trilogies. Lots of science fiction trilogies, too. Yeah. It's almost a sub
-genre, actually. And now there are four and five books, actually. Gene Wolfe's
Torture series. The lead is going to be five volumes. no end to it. Of course
there's a Farm Reserver Boat series that just goes on and on and on.
Do you imagine in this trilogy you will have constructed sort of a future
history? Yeah it turns out that way. Do you think you might follow it up with
later novels or is that just further on down the line? No, the third volume,
Gods, covers about a million years, I think. So there's not much point in
thinking about a fourth one. In other words, you take it far into the future?
Yeah. Okay. I wanted to try a Stapeldonian kind of novel.
It'll be the most difficult one, I think. Taking it that far into the future,
the possibilities are just about limitless. Yeah.
And it will probably be optimistic. The first book is not too optimistic, it's a
dystopian kind of thing. Jack Williamson says that, uh, most science fiction
works, in fact, most mainstream things are divided between either utopian or
dystopian viewpoints.
Well, the point is neither one is mutually exclusive. It's possible to have a
complex enough vision of the future that we can see alternation, utopia and
dystopia. That's another good thing about having a scoped canvas of a trilogy.
Yeah, it would allow you to cover a lot of areas. Yeah. and I can run what I'm
doing both the first and the second is describing two cultures being able to
switch from chapter to chapter and use one to illuminate the other and in fact
one is a utopia and one is a dystopia okay I've covered all my questions that I
have down here plus a couple I made up as I went along Daryl is there anything
that you would like
Do you have any authors that you really enjoy reading, science fiction in
particular? Well it varies a lot. I guess Gene Wolfe is my favorite writer right
now. I like Roger Zelazny very much. Actually I'm reading The Number of the
Beast right now. Heinlein as an old favorite but I've not been too happy about
his later books the number the beast is turning out to be rather more
entertaining than I thought it would be
let me see I like Silverberg and Lee Quinn and quite a bit of Chip Delany
Samuel Delany so Fred Pohl Fred Pohl is doing marvelous work The problem is I
don't read too much science fiction. I read something after 16 people have raved
about it. And I finally go pick it up. Or 16 people hated it. And I want to find
out why. Good reasons for both. Wow. Yeah, that covers about what we wanted to
do. Any loose ends on your end? No, no. Oh, I can't believe it. Okay, we're
shutting down the tape. Oh, I don't know.